

Oncogenic (cancer-causing) viruses contribute to 15–20% of cancers worldwide.
Major cancer-linked viruses include HPV, EBV, HBV, HCV, HTLV-1 and HHV-8, each associated with specific malignancies such as cervical, liver and lymphatic cancers.
Diagnostics combine molecular tests and immunoassays to detect viral DNA/RNA, viral proteins and immune responses for early detection and accurate tumor classification.
Immunoassays remain essential because they are cost-effective, scalable, and accessible, being used in automated labs, point-of-care settings and more.
Immunoassays complement molecular testing, providing critical clinical insights such as antibody levels, viral antigens and treatment monitoring markers.
Integrated testing strategies, combining immunoassays with genomic technologies, are key to improving the early detection, personalized treatment and long-term monitoring of virus-related cancers.
Is cancer a virus? The simple answer is no – cancer is not an infectious virus. It’s a disease that causes some of the body’s cells to grow uncontrollably and spread to other parts of the body.1

However, scientists have discovered that infectious agents contribute to 15–20% of human cancers worldwide.2 These agents are known as oncogenic viruses, or oncoviruses.2

Recognizing the link between viruses and cancers has reshaped cancer prevention and diagnosis.2 For example, widespread human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination and screening is reducing cervical cancer rates, and hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccination has reduced the chronic HBV infections linked to liver cancer.2 Diagnostics have also evolved to identify viral causes of tumors, which helps doctors tailor prevention and treatment strategies.2

While new molecular tests are emerging, immunoassays remain central at every step of the patient pathway for virus-linked cancers. From the early detection of viral infections3 to monitoring treatment,4 immunoassays provide actionable insights. Crucially, they often do so in ways that are more accessible and scalable than those of molecular assays.5 

Rather than being replaced by genetic tests, immunoassays complement molecular diagnostics, ensuring that viral oncology is integrated into everyday clinical practice in a practical, cost-effective way. This is where trusted immunoassay material suppliers like Medix Biochemica can help.

Cancer-causing viruses and their diagnostics 
Many common human viruses can set the stage for cancer as a result of years of chronic infection. Below, we highlight key virus–cancer connections and how diagnostics detect these viruses or their effects.

 
HPV – cervical and head and neck cancers
HPV is a common DNA virus transmitted by skin-to-skin and sexual contact.2,6 More than 600 million people globally have HPV.2 The virus can cause abnormal tissue growth (such as warts) and other changes to cells.7 It produces oncoproteins, which disrupt cell safeguards and can trigger malignant transformation of the affected tissue over time.6  

High-risk strains of HPV are responsible for 99% of cervical cancer cases, as well as a significant proportion of cancers of the anus, penis, vagina, vulva and throat.2 In fact, HPV alone is responsible for an estimated 5% of all cancers worldwide when you combine these sites.2

Diagnostics for HPV
The cornerstone of cervical cancer screening today is HPV DNA testing, which detects high-risk HPV genetic material in cervical samples.7,8 These molecular tests are highly sensitive, finding the virus early. However, immunoassays play a pivotal role too. In pathology labs, immunohistochemistry (IHC) is used on biopsy specimens as a surrogate marker of HPV-driven cancer.9 Specifically, staining for the p16 protein (which accumulates in HPV-infected tumor cells) is widely recommended for head and neck tumors to confirm HPV involvement.9 The College of American Pathologists advises using p16 IHC on oropharyngeal cancers because it is affordable, fast and reliable in predicting HPV-positive status.9 

Immunoassays are also used in HPV vaccine research and epidemiology to measure antibodies that act against HPV.10 In clinical practice, serological tests for HPV antibodies are not routine diagnostics for infection (since most people eventually clear HPV); however, emerging studies suggest that antibodies against HPV’s oncoproteins (like E6/E7) might serve as biomarkers for cancer risk and recurrence monitoring.